GLiNER PII updates to notebook, docs, and scripts (#1845)
NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails: docs/configure-rails/guardrail-catalog/community/gliner.md

# GLiNER Integration

[GLiNER](https://github.com/urchade/GLiNER) is a generalist and lightweight model for named entity recognition. [NVIDIA GLiNER-PII](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/gliner-PII) is an adaptation that detects a wide range of PII categories. This integration enables NeMo Guardrails to use GLiNER-PII for PII detection and masking in input, output, and retrieval flows.

## Prerequisites

> To use the NVIDIA-hosted NIMs in Steps 1–3, set your NVIDIA API key:

Reviewer: Remove the step range now that the headings no longer use numbered titles.
```suggestion
To use the NVIDIA-hosted NIMs, set your NVIDIA API key:
```

```bash
export NVIDIA_API_KEY="nvapi-..."
```

You can obtain an API key at [build.nvidia.com](https://build.nvidia.com).

You will also need to [install](../../../getting-started/installation-guide.md) the NeMo Guardrails library.

> ## 1. Configure Guardrails

Reviewer: Remove the number from the heading.
```suggestion
## Configure Guardrails
```

# GLiNER Integration

[GLiNER](https://github.com/urchade/GLiNER) is a generalist and lightweight model for named entity recognition. [NVIDIA GLiNER-PII](https://huggingface.co/nvidia/gliner-PII) is an adaptation that detects a wide range of PII categories. This integration enables NeMo Guardrails to use GLiNER-PII for PII detection and masking in input, output, and retrieval flows.

## Prerequisites

> To use the NVIDIA-hosted NIMs in Steps 1–3, set your NVIDIA API key:

Reviewer 2: Can you link to the instructions on installing Guardrails?

Author: I added the link in Commit [98fbb02](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/98fbb02b73839d089dd5cce92a3781c272acda38)

```bash
export NVIDIA_API_KEY="nvapi-..."
```

You can obtain an API key at [build.nvidia.com](https://build.nvidia.com).

## 1. Configure Guardrails

Create a `config` directory and add a `config.yml` file. The examples below target the NVIDIA-hosted GLiNER-PII and Llama 3.1 8B NIM endpoints.

`nvidia/gliner-pii` does not appear in the configs below because it is the default value of `rails.config.gliner.model`. You only need to set that field explicitly if you want to use a different model:

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to include this config snippet? This wouldn't work on its own

Author: I submitted Commit [8f8fe26](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/8f8fe26b5df7c5004dae828d923d88f31ebcbb50) to address this

rails:
  config:
    gliner:
      model: nvidia/gliner-pii  # default — omit or change as needed
```

> ### PII Detection

Reviewer 2: Can you add instructions like 'save the following as config.yml'?

Author: I submitted Commit [8f8fe26](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/8f8fe26b5df7c5004dae828d923d88f31ebcbb50) to address this

> The detection flow blocks any input or output that contains PII.

Reviewer 2: I ran this and got the error below

```
Details: 404 page not found

GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/actions/action_dispatcher.py", line 215, in execute_action
    result = await result
             ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py", line 100, in gliner_detect_pii
    gliner_response = await gliner_request(
                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    ...<7 lines>...
    )
    ^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py", line 95, in gliner_request
    raise ValueError(f"GLiNER call failed with status code {resp.status}.\nDetails: {await resp.text()}")
ValueError: GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found

```

Author: As I mentioned in a Slack DM yesterday, I've resolved this. The fix turns out to be ridiculously simple, and I don't even need to push any additional code. I modified (or rather, had Claude modify) Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py and Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py. If you run poetry install --with docs in the Guardrails home directory (inside the appropriate virtual environment where you're testing my code, of course), the changes I made to the Python source files should be properly installed in the nemoguardrails Python module and CLI, and you should circumvent the 404 errors.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: I tried this config and also got a 404 error:

```
Details: 404 page not found

GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/actions/action_dispatcher.py", line 215, in execute_action
    result = await result
             ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py", line 145, in gliner_mask_pii
    gliner_response = await gliner_request(
                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    ...<7 lines>...
    )
    ^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py", line 95, in gliner_request
    raise ValueError(f"GLiNER call failed with status code {resp.status}.\nDetails: {await resp.text()}")
ValueError: GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found

I'm sorry, an internal error has occurred.

```

Author: As I mentioned in a Slack DM yesterday, I've resolved this. The fix turns out to be ridiculously simple, and I don't even need to push any additional code. I modified (or rather, had Claude modify) Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py and Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py. If you run poetry install --with docs in the Guardrails home directory (inside the appropriate virtual environment where you're testing my code, of course), the changes I made to the Python source files should be properly installed in the nemoguardrails Python module and CLI, and you should circumvent the 404 errors.

      - gliner detect pii on output
```

### PII Masking

The masking flow replaces detected PII with label placeholders before the LLM processes the text, rather than blocking the request outright. For example, `Hi, I'm John — john@example.com` becomes `Hi, I'm [FIRST_NAME] — [EMAIL]`. To implement this flow, save the config below as your `config.yml` file.

```yaml
models:
  - type: main
    engine: nim
    model: meta/llama-3.1-8b-instruct
    api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY

rails:
  config:
    gliner:
      server_endpoint: https://integrate.api.nvidia.com/v1/chat/completions
      api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY
      threshold: 0.5
      input:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
      output:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
  input:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on input
  output:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on output
```

## 2. Run the Guardrails Chat CLI

Start an interactive chat session using your config directory:

```bash

> nemoguardrails chat --config ./config.yml

Author: Fixed with Commit [cc749b7](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/cc749b7e4900b1a384be0d28b6b1e9f42c877e61)

      - gliner detect pii on output
```

### PII Masking

> The masking flow replaces detected PII with label placeholders before the LLM processes the text, rather than blocking the request outright. For example, `Hi, I'm John — john@example.com` becomes `Hi, I'm [FIRST_NAME] — [EMAIL]`. To implement this flow, save the config below as your `config.yml` file.

Reviewer: Use active technical voice and remove em dashes from the inline example.
```suggestion
The masking flow replaces detected PII with label placeholders before the LLM processes the text, rather than blocking the request outright. For example, `Hi, I am John. My email is john@example.com` becomes `Hi, I am [FIRST_NAME]. My email is [EMAIL]`. To implement this flow, save the config below as your `config.yml` file.
```

```yaml
models:
  - type: main
    engine: nim
    model: meta/llama-3.1-8b-instruct
    api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY

rails:
  config:
    gliner:
      server_endpoint: https://integrate.api.nvidia.com/v1/chat/completions
      api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY
      threshold: 0.5
      input:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
      output:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
  input:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on input
  output:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on output
```

> ## 2. Run the Guardrails Chat CLI

Reviewer: Remove the number from the heading.
```suggestion
## Run the Guardrails Chat CLI
```

Start an interactive chat session using your config directory:

```bash

> nemoguardrails chat --config ./config

Reviewer 2: Should this be `nemoguardrails chat --config config.yml`? The paragraphs above say to save to the `config.yml` file

Author: Resolved with Commit [47821a4](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/47821a444ada7673b5373a791c3925d8fdef3f73)

```

With **PII detection** enabled, any message containing PII is blocked before reaching the LLM:

```text
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
I'm sorry, I can't respond to that.
```

With **PII masking** enabled, PII is replaced in-place before the LLM sees the message:

```text
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
Nice to meet you, [FIRST_NAME]! How can I help you today?
```

> ## 3. Use the Python SDK

Reviewer: Remove the number from the heading.
```suggestion
## Use the Python SDK
```

```python
import nest_asyncio
nest_asyncio.apply()

from nemoguardrails import LLMRails, RailsConfig

config = RailsConfig.from_path("./config")
rails = LLMRails(config)

response = rails.generate(
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com."}]
)
print(response["content"])

# Inspect the guardrail execution trace
info = rails.explain()
print(info.colang_history)
```

> ## 4. Deploy NIMs Locally

Reviewer: Remove the number from the heading.
```suggestion
## Deploy NIMs Locally
```

> Running both NIMs locally eliminates network round-trips and removes the NVIDIA API key requirement for inference. You still need an NGC API key to pull the Docker images — obtain one at [ngc.nvidia.com](https://ngc.nvidia.com).

Reviewer: Remove the em dash and keep the sentence direct.
```suggestion
Running both NIMs locally eliminates network round-trips and removes the NVIDIA API key requirement for inference. You still need an NGC API key to pull the Docker images from [ngc.nvidia.com](https://ngc.nvidia.com).
```

> ### GPU requirements

Reviewer: Use title case for the heading.
```suggestion
### GPU Requirements
```

| NIM | Min GPUs | Min VRAM | Compatible GPUs |
|-----|----------|----------|-----------------|
| `nvidia/gliner-pii` | 1 | 4 GB | T4, L4, A10, A10G, A100, H100, L40S |
| `meta/llama-3.1-8b-instruct` | 1 | 16 GB | L4, A10G, A100 (40 GB or 80 GB), H100, L40S |

The Llama NIM auto-selects the optimal TensorRT-LLM profile (FP16 or INT8) based on available hardware. An A10G (24 GB) or L4 (24 GB) is the practical minimum for comfortable headroom; a T4 (16 GB) may work but is not officially supported.

> > **Note:** `nvidia/gliner-pii` is pre-GA (`1.0.0-rc1`); its GPU requirements above are estimates based on the GLiNER encoder-only architecture and have not been officially published by NVIDIA.

Reviewer: Use active voice for the publication status.
```suggestion
> **Note:** `nvidia/gliner-pii` is pre-GA (`1.0.0-rc1`). The GPU requirements above are estimates based on the GLiNER encoder-only architecture because NVIDIA has not officially published requirements yet.
```

> ### Start the containers

Reviewer: Use title case for the heading.
```suggestion
### Start the Containers
```

> **GLiNER-PII NIM** — runs on port 8000:

Reviewer: Remove the em dash and make the sentence active.
```suggestion
The **GLiNER-PII NIM** runs on port 8000:
```

```bash
# Authenticate with NGC (username: $oauthtoken, password: your NGC API key)
echo $NGC_API_KEY | docker login -u '$oauthtoken' --password-stdin nvcr.io

> docker run --rm -it --gpus all \

Reviewer 2: Does this work? I would have thought you'd specify different GPUs for Gliner and the LLama model rather than `all` for both?

Author: As I recall, it did work, but you're right, it's better practice to specify different GPUs when possible. I resolved this with Commit [b0305e7](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/b0305e79a39b757de2b254fdbc08f0dab9a030a9).

  -e NGC_API_KEY \
  -p 8000:8000 \
  nvcr.io/nim/nvidia/gliner-pii:1.0.0-rc1
```

> **Llama 3.1 8B Instruct NIM** — mapped to port 8001 to avoid conflict with GLiNER:

Reviewer: Remove the em dash and make the sentence active.
```suggestion
Map the **Llama 3.1 8B Instruct NIM** to port 8001 to avoid a conflict with GLiNER:
```

```bash
docker run --rm -it --gpus all \
  -e NGC_API_KEY \
  -p 8001:8000 \
  nvcr.io/nim/meta/llama-3.1-8b-instruct:latest
```

Wait until both containers log `Application startup complete` before proceeding.

> ### Update config.yml

Reviewer: Avoid a filename in the heading and use title case.
```suggestion
### Update the Configuration
```

```yaml
models:
  - type: main
    engine: nim
    model: meta/llama-3.1-8b-instruct
    api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY

rails:
  config:
    gliner:
      server_endpoint: https://integrate.api.nvidia.com/v1/chat/completions
      api_key_env_var: NVIDIA_API_KEY
      threshold: 0.5
      input:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
      output:
        entities:
          - first_name
          - last_name
          - email
          - phone_number
  input:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on input
  output:
    flows:
      - gliner mask pii on output
```

## 2. Run the Guardrails Chat CLI

Start an interactive chat session using your config directory:

```bash
nemoguardrails chat --config ./config
```

With **PII detection** enabled, any message containing PII is blocked before reaching the LLM:

```
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
I'm sorry, I can't respond to that.
```

With **PII masking** enabled, PII is replaced in-place before the LLM sees the message:

```
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
Nice to meet you, [FIRST_NAME]! How can I help you today?

> ```

Author: Fixed with Commit [12df965](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/12df965a09d988c29f30cdeea012c8b27d8651ed)

> ## 3. Use the Python SDK

Reviewer 2: I also got a 404 error running this:

```Details: 404 page not found

GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/actions/action_dispatcher.py", line 215, in execute_action
    result = await result
             ^^^^^^^^^^^^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py", line 145, in gliner_mask_pii
    gliner_response = await gliner_request(
                      ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
    ...<7 lines>...
    )
    ^
  File "/Users/tgasser/projects/nemo_guardrails_review/Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py", line 95, in gliner_request
    raise ValueError(f"GLiNER call failed with status code {resp.status}.\nDetails: {await resp.text()}")
ValueError: GLiNER call failed with status code 404.
Details: 404 page not found

I'm sorry, an internal error has occurred.
execute gliner_mask_pii
# The result was None
bot inform internal error occurred
  "I'm sorry, an internal error has occurred."
bot stop
```

Author: As I mentioned yesterday in a Slack DM, I've resolved this. The fix turns out to be ridiculously simple, and I don't even need to push any additional code. I modified (or rather, had Claude modify) Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/request.py and Guardrails/nemoguardrails/library/gliner/actions.py. If you run poetry install --with docs in the Guardrails home directory (inside the appropriate virtual environment where you're testing my code, of course), the changes I made to the Python source files should be properly installed in the nemoguardrails Python module and CLI, and you should circumvent the 404 errors.

```python
import nest_asyncio
nest_asyncio.apply()

from nemoguardrails import LLMRails, RailsConfig

config = RailsConfig.from_path("./config")
rails = LLMRails(config)

response = rails.generate(
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com."}]
)
print(response["content"])

# Inspect the guardrail execution trace
info = rails.explain()
print(info.colang_history)
```

## 4. Deploy NIMs Locally

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you add some description here on the machine you need to run this, how many GPUs, and what types?

Author: I added a subsection on GPU requirements for local NIM hosting in Commit [42afe2d](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/42afe2de306062402cb1e5d1a5ec82361787d8fb). Does that look good?

Author: @tgasser-nv, I'm marking this as resolved, but if you disagree, feel free to reopen the conversation.

```text
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
I'm sorry, I can't respond to that.
```

With **PII masking** enabled, PII is replaced in-place before the LLM sees the message:

```text
> Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com.
Nice to meet you, [FIRST_NAME]! How can I help you today?
```

## 3. Use the Python SDK

```python
import nest_asyncio
nest_asyncio.apply()

from nemoguardrails import LLMRails, RailsConfig

config = RailsConfig.from_path("./config")
rails = LLMRails(config)

response = rails.generate(
    messages=[{"role": "user", "content": "Hello! My name is John and my email is john@example.com."}]
)
print(response["content"])

# Inspect the guardrail execution trace
info = rails.explain()
print(info.colang_history)
```

## 4. Deploy NIMs Locally

Running both NIMs locally eliminates network round-trips and removes the NVIDIA API key requirement for inference. You still need an NGC API key to pull the Docker images — obtain one at [ngc.nvidia.com](https://ngc.nvidia.com).

### Start the containers

**GLiNER-PII NIM** — runs on port 8000:

```bash
# Authenticate with NGC (username: $oauthtoken, password: your NGC API key)

> echo $NGC_API_KEY | docker login nvcr.io -u '$oauthtoken' --password-stdin nvcr.io

Author: Resolved with Commit [81c7541](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/pull/1845/commits/81c75416fa9248c2b01362595b5b0f381ab015f2)

      - gliner mask pii on output
```

> ### Repeat Steps 2 and 3

Reviewer: Remove numbered step references from the heading.
```suggestion
### Reuse the CLI and SDK Workflows
```

> With the containers running and config updated, rerun the CLI and SDK commands from [Step 2](#2-run-the-guardrails-chat-cli) and [Step 3](#3-use-the-python-sdk). No other changes are required.

Reviewer: Update the anchor text after removing numbered headings.
```suggestion
With the containers running and config updated, rerun the CLI and SDK commands from [Run the Guardrails Chat CLI](#run-the-guardrails-chat-cli) and [Use the Python SDK](#use-the-python-sdk). No other changes are required.
```

---

## API Specification

The GLiNER-PII NIM exposes an OpenAI-compatible chat completions endpoint.

> ### `POST /v1/chat/completions`

Reviewer: Avoid code formatting and numbers in the heading.
```suggestion
### Chat Completions Endpoint
```

pytest tests/test_gliner.py -v
```

> For a self-hosted alternative using the `nvidia/gliner-PII` model directly, the [`examples/deployment/gliner_server/`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/tree/develop/examples/deployment/gliner_server/) directory provides a reference implementation. It exposes a `POST /v1/extract` endpoint — if you use it, set `server_endpoint` to `http://localhost:1235/v1/extract`. Refer to the [deployment README](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/tree/develop/examples/deployment/gliner_server/README.md) for setup instructions.

Reviewer: Remove the em dash and split the long sentence into active, technical statements.
```suggestion
For a self-hosted alternative using the `nvidia/gliner-PII` model directly, the [`examples/deployment/gliner_server/`](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/tree/develop/examples/deployment/gliner_server/) directory provides a reference implementation. The server exposes a `POST /v1/extract` endpoint. If you use it, set `server_endpoint` to `http://localhost:1235/v1/extract`. Refer to the [deployment README](https://github.com/NVIDIA-NeMo/Guardrails/tree/develop/examples/deployment/gliner_server/README.md) for setup instructions.
```
